Modify S3457: Migrate to LayC - `printf`-style format string are misused (#3305)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S3457/cfamily/rule.adoc

== Why is this an issue?

> https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/io/fprintf[`printf`] format strings contain placeholders, represented by special characters such as "%s". These placeholders are replaced by values when the string is printed or logged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/io/fprintf[`printf`] format strings contain placeholders, represented by special characters such as "%s". These placeholders are replaced at runtime with values.
```

Because `printf` format strings are interpreted at runtime rather than validated by the compiler, they can contain errors that result in the wrong string being created. This rule statically validates the correlation of `printf` format strings and their arguments.

> Starting with C++20, `std::format` should be preferred, as it is more readable and validated at compile-time, making it more secure. The rule S6494 covers that.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with C++20, `std::format` should be preferred, as it is more readable and validated at compile-time, making it more secure. Rule S6494 covers that.
```

This rule is about errors that produce an unexpected string. For errors that will create undefined behavior, see the related rule S2275.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Detected problems are:

* Unused arguments
+
[source,cpp]
----
printf("Numbers: %d", 1, 2); // Noncompliant: the second argument "2" is unused
----

* Ignored flags
+
[source,cpp]
----
printf("Formatted number: %0-f", 1.2); // Noncompliant: flag "0" is ignored because of "-"
----
```

This rule will only work if the format string is provided as a string literal.

== How to fix it

A `printf` format string contains placeholders, replaced by values when the string is printed or logged. Mismatch in the format specifiers and the arguments provided can lead to incorrect strings being created.

To avoid issues, a developer should ensure that the provided arguments match format specifiers. If possible, `std::format` from C++20 should be preferred.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
printf("Numbers: %d", 1, 2); // Noncompliant: the second argument "2" is unused
printf("Formatted number: %0-f", 1.2); // Noncompliant: flag "0" is ignored because of "-"
----

==== Compliant solution

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

With `std::format` and `std::print`

[source,cpp]
----
std::print("Numbers: {} {}", 1, 2);
std::print("Formatted number: {:f}", 1.2);
----

With `printf`:

```

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
printf("Numbers: %d %d", 1, 2);

> printf("Formatted number: %-0f", 1.2);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
printf("Formatted number: %-f", 1.2);
```

== Why is this an issue?

https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/io/fprintf[`printf`] format strings contain placeholders, represented by special characters such as "%s". These placeholders are replaced at runtime with values.

Because `printf` format strings are interpreted at runtime rather than validated by the compiler, they can contain errors that result in the wrong string being created. This rule checks whether the format string specifiers of `printf` can be correctly matched with one of the additional arguments.

Starting with C++20, https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/format/format[`std::format`] should be preferred, as it is more readable and validated at compile-time, making it more secure. Rule S6494 covers that.

This rule is about errors that produce an unexpected string. For errors that will create undefined behavior, see the related rule S2275.

Detected problems are:

* Unused arguments
+
[source,cpp]
----
printf("Numbers: %d", 1, 2); // Noncompliant: the second argument "2" is unused
----

* Ignored flags
+
[source,cpp]
----
printf("Formatted number: %0-f", 1.2); // Noncompliant: flag "0" is ignored because of "-"
----

> This rule will only work if the format string is provided as a string literal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This rule will only work if the format string is provided as a string literal.
```
My previous suggestion was missing a linebreak here.
